OSDOCS-7782: Migrated Dynamic Certificates for ROSA custom domain from MOBB to ROSA (#65851)
openshift/openshift-docs: cloud_experts_tutorials/cloud-experts-dynamic-certificate-custom-domain.adoc

:_content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="cloud-experts-dynamic-certificate-custom-domain"]

> = Tutorial: Dynamically issue certificates using the cert-manager Operator on ROSA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Tutorial: Dynamically issuing certificates using the cert-manager Operator on ROSA
```

include::_attributes/attributes-openshift-dedicated.adoc[]
:context: cloud-experts-dynamic-certificate-custom-domain

toc::[]

//Mobb content metadata
//Brought into ROSA product docs 2023-09-20
//---
//date: '2022-10-11'
//title: Dynamic Certificates for ROSA Custom Domain
//weight: 1
//tags: ["AWS", "ROSA"]
//authors:
//   Kevin Collins
//---

While wildcard certificates provide simplicity by securing all first-level subdomains of a given domain with a single certificate, other use cases may require the use of individual certificates per domain. This tutorial guides you through using the link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/latest/security/cert_manager_operator/index.html[cert-manager Operator for Red Hat OpenShift] and link:https://letsencrypt.org/[Let's Encrypt] to dynamically issue certificates for routes created using a custom domain. 

== Prerequisites

* A ROSA cluster
* You have access to the OpenShift CLI (`oc`)
* You have access to the AWS CLI (`aws`)
* A unique domain, such as *.apps.<company_name>.io
* An Amazon Route 53 public hosted zone for the above domain

> === Environment setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Setting up your environment
```

> === Environment setup

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this should be a level three or level two subheading. It isn't a crucial debate however and we can always adjust it later.

. Configure the following environment variables:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ export DOMAIN=apps.<company_name>.io <1>
$ export EMAIL=<youremail@company_name.io> <2>
$ export AWS_PAGER=""
$ export CLUSTER_NAME=$(oc get infrastructure cluster -o=jsonpath="{.status.infrastructureName}"  | sed 's/-[a-z0-9]\{5\}$//')
$ export OIDC_ENDPOINT=$(oc get authentication.config.openshift.io cluster -o json | jq -r .spec.serviceAccountIssuer | sed  's|^https://||')
$ export REGION=$(oc get infrastructure cluster -o=jsonpath="{.status.platformStatus.aws.region}")
$ export AWS_ACCOUNT_ID=$(aws sts get-caller-identity --query Account --output text)
$ export SCRATCH="/tmp/${CLUSTER_NAME}/dynamic-certs"
$ mkdir -p ${SCRATCH}
$ echo "Cluster: ${CLUSTER_NAME}, Region: ${REGION}, OIDC Endpoint: ${OIDC_ENDPOINT}, AWS Account ID: ${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}"
----
<1> The custom domain.
<2> The e-mail Let's Encrypt will use to send notifications about your certificates.

> == Prepare AWS account

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Preparing your AWS account
```

> When cert-manager requests a certificate from Let’s Encrypt (or another ACME certificate issuer), Let's Encrypt servers validate that you control the domain name in that certificate using “challenges". For this tutorial, we're using a link:https://letsencrypt.org/docs/challenge-types/#dns-01-challenge[DNS-01 challenge] that proves that you control the DNS for your domain name by putting a specific value in a TXT record under that domain name. This is all done automatically by cert-manager. To allow cert-manager permission to modify the Amazon Route 53 public hosted zone for our domain, you need to create an IAM role with specific policy permissions and a trust relationship to allow access to the pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When cert-manager requests a certificate from Let’s Encrypt (or another ACME certificate issuer), Let's Encrypt servers validate that you control the domain name in that certificate using “challenges". For this tutorial, we are using a link:https://letsencrypt.org/docs/challenge-types/#dns-01-challenge[DNS-01 challenge] that proves that you control the DNS for your domain name by putting a specific value in a TXT record under that domain name. This is all done automatically by cert-manager. To allow cert-manager permission to modify the Amazon Route 53 public hosted zone for your domain, you need to create an IAM role with specific policy permissions and a trust relationship to allow access to the pod.
```
I'm not sure about the changes of "our" to "your". If anything is owned by Red Hat, please ignore my changes it keep it as "our".

> The public hosted zone that is used in this tutorial is in the same account as the ROSA cluster. If your public hosted zone is in a different accounts, a few additional steps for link:https://cert-manager.io/docs/configuration/acme/dns01/route53/#cross-account-access[Cross Account Access] is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The public hosted zone that is used in this tutorial is in the same account as the ROSA cluster. If your public hosted zone is in a different account, a few additional steps for link:https://cert-manager.io/docs/configuration/acme/dns01/route53/#cross-account-access[Cross Account Access] are required.
```

      "Resource": "arn:aws:route53:::change/*"
    },
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": [
        "route53:ChangeResourceRecordSets",
        "route53:ListResourceRecordSets"
      ],
      "Resource": "arn:aws:route53:::hostedzone/${ZONE_ID}"
    },
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": "route53:ListHostedZonesByName",
      "Resource": "*"
    }
  ]
}
EOF
----
+
. Create the IAM Policy using the file you created in the previous step:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ POLICY_ARN=$(aws iam create-policy --policy-name "${CLUSTER_NAME}-cert-manager-policy" \
  --policy-document file://${SCRATCH}/cert-manager-policy.json \
  --query 'Policy.Arn' --output text)
----
. Create an AWS IAM trust policy for the cert-manager Operator:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ cat <<EOF > "${SCRATCH}/trust-policy.json"
{
 "Version": "2012-10-17",
 "Statement": [
 {
 "Effect": "Allow",
 "Condition": {
   "StringEquals" : {
     "${OIDC_ENDPOINT}:sub": "system:serviceaccount:cert-manager:cert-manager"
   }
 },
 "Principal": {
   "Federated": "arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:oidc-provider/${OIDC_ENDPOINT}"
 },
 "Action": "sts:AssumeRoleWithWebIdentity"
 }
 ]
}
EOF
----
+

> . Create an IAM Role for the cert-manager Operator using the trust policy we created in the previous step:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create an IAM Role for the cert-manager Operator using the trust policy you created in the previous step:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ ROLE_ARN=$(aws iam create-role --role-name "${CLUSTER_NAME}-cert-manager-operator" \
   --assume-role-policy-document "file://${SCRATCH}/trust-policy.json" \
   --query Role.Arn --output text)
----
+
. Attach the permissions policy to the role:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name "${CLUSTER_NAME}-cert-manager-operator" \
  --policy-arn ${POLICY_ARN}
----

> == Install the cert-manager Operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Installing the cert-manager Operator
```

====
+
. Install the cert-manager Operator for Red Hat OpenShift:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ cat << EOF | oc apply -f -
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1
kind: OperatorGroup
metadata:
  name: openshift-cert-manager-operator-group
  namespace: cert-manager-operator
spec:
  targetNamespaces:
  - cert-manager-operator
---
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Subscription
metadata:
  name: openshift-cert-manager-operator
  namespace: cert-manager-operator
spec:
  channel: stable-v1
  installPlanApproval: Automatic
  name: openshift-cert-manager-operator
  source: redhat-operators
  sourceNamespace: openshift-marketplace
EOF
----
+
[NOTE]
====
It will take a few minutes for this Operator to install and complete its set up.
====
+
. Verify that the cert-manager Operator is running:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n cert-manager-operator get pods
----
.Example output
+
[source,text]
----
NAME                                                        READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
cert-manager-operator-controller-manager-84b8799db5-gv8mx   2/2     Running   0          12s
----
+

> . Annotate the service account used by the cert-manager pods with the AWS IAM role we created earlier:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Annotate the service account used by the cert-manager pods with the AWS IAM role you created earlier:
```

----
+
. Restart the existing cert-manager controller pod by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n cert-manager delete pods -l app.kubernetes.io/name=cert-manager
----
+
. Patch the Operator's configuration to use external nameservers to prevent DNS-01 challenge resolution issues:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch certmanager.operator.openshift.io/cluster --type merge \
  -p '{"spec":{"controllerConfig":{"overrideArgs":["--dns01-recursive-nameservers-only","--dns01-recursive-nameservers=1.1.1.1:53"]}}}'
----
+
. Create a `ClusterIssuer` resource to use Let's Encrypt by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ cat << EOF | oc apply -f -
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: ClusterIssuer
metadata:
  name: letsencrypt-production
spec:
  acme:
    server: https://acme-v02.api.letsencrypt.org/directory
    email: ${EMAIL}
    # This key doesn't exist, cert-manager creates it
    privateKeySecretRef:
      name: prod-letsencrypt-issuer-account-key
    solvers:
    - dns01:
        route53:
         hostedZoneID: ${ZONE_ID}
         region: ${REGION}
         secretAccessKeySecretRef:
           name: ''
EOF
----
+

> . Check the `ClusterIssuer` resource to confirm it's ready:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Check the `ClusterIssuer` resource to confirm it is ready:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get clusterissuer.cert-manager.io/letsencrypt-production
----
+
.Example output
+
[source,text]
----
NAME                     READY   AGE
letsencrypt-production   True    47s
----

> == Create a custom domain ingress controller

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Creating a custom domain ingress controller
```

> . Create a new project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a new project:
```

spec:
  secretName: custom-domain-ingress-cert-tls
  issuerRef:
     name: letsencrypt-production
     kind: ClusterIssuer
  commonName: "${DOMAIN}"
  dnsNames:
  - "${DOMAIN}"
EOF
----
+
. Verify the certificate has been issued:
+
[NOTE]
====
It will take a few minutes for this certificate to be issued by Let's Encrypt. If it takes longer than 5 minutes, run `oc -n custom-domain-ingress describe certificate.cert-manager.io/custom-domain-ingress-cert` to see any issues reported by cert-manager.
====
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n custom-domain-ingress get certificate.cert-manager.io/custom-domain-ingress-cert
----
+
.Example output
+
[source,text]
----
NAME                         READY   SECRET                           AGE
custom-domain-ingress-cert   True    custom-domain-ingress-cert-tls   9m53s
----
+
. Create a new `CustomDomain` custom resource (CR):
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ cat << EOF | oc apply -f -
apiVersion: managed.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: CustomDomain
metadata:
  name: custom-domain-ingress
spec:
  domain: ${DOMAIN}
  scope: External
  loadBalancerType: NLB
  certificate:
    name: custom-domain-ingress-cert-tls
    namespace: custom-domain-ingress
EOF
----

> . Verify that your custom domain Ingress Controller has been deployed and is `Ready`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Verify that your custom domain Ingress Controller has been deployed and is ready:
```

custom-domain-ingress   tfoxdx.custom-domain-ingress.cluster.1234.p1.openshiftapps.com         example.com       Ready
----
+
. Prepare a document with the necessary DNS changes to enable DNS resolution for your custom domain Ingress Controller:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ INGRESS=$(oc get customdomain.managed.openshift.io/custom-domain-ingress --template={{.status.endpoint}})
$ cat << EOF > "${SCRATCH}/create-cname.json"
{
  "Comment":"Add CNAME to custom domain endpoint",
  "Changes":[{
      "Action":"CREATE",
      "ResourceRecordSet":{
        "Name": "*.${DOMAIN}",
      "Type":"CNAME",
      "TTL":30,
      "ResourceRecords":[{
        "Value": "${INGRESS}"
      }]
    }
  }]
}
EOF
----
+
. Submit your changes to Amazon Route 53 for propagation: 
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ aws route53 change-resource-record-sets \
  --hosted-zone-id ${ZONE_ID} \
  --change-batch file://${SCRATCH}/create-cname.json
----
+
[NOTE]
====
While the wildcard CNAME record avoids the need to create a new record for every new application you deploy using the custom domain Ingress Controller, the certificate that each of these applications use *is not* a wildcard certificate.
====

> == Configure dynamic certificates for custom domain routes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Configuring dynamic certificates for custom domain routes
```

> At this stage, you can expose cluster applications on any first-level subdomains of the specified domain, but the connection will not be secured with a TLS certificate that matches the domain of the application. To ensure these cluster applications have valid certificates for each domain name, you will configure cert-manager to dynamically issue a certificate to every new route created under this domain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this stage, you can expose cluster applications on any first-level subdomains of the specified domain, but the connection will not be secured with a TLS certificate that matches the domain of the application. To ensure these cluster applications have valid certificates for each domain name, configure cert-manager to dynamically issue a certificate to every new route created under this domain.
```

. Create the necessary OpenShift resources cert-manager requires to manage certificates for OpenShift routes:
+

> This step creates a new deployment (and therefore a pod) that'll watch out for specifically annotated routes in the cluster, and if the issuer-kind and issuer-name annotations are found in a new route, it will request the Issuer (ClusterIssuer in this case) for a new Certificate that's unique to this route and which will honor the hostname that was specified while creating the route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step creates a new deployment (and therefore a pod) that specifically monitors annotated routes in the cluster. If the issuer-kind and issuer-name annotations are found in a new route, it requests the Issuer (ClusterIssuer in this case) for a new certificate that is unique to this route and which will honor the hostname that was specified while creating the route.
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n cert-manager apply -f https://github.com/cert-manager/openshift-routes/releases/latest/download/cert-manager-openshift-routes.yaml
----
+

> Additional OpenShift resources such as a `ClusterRole` (with permissions to watch and update the routes across the cluster), a `ServiceAccount` (with these permissions, that will be used to run this newly created pod), and a `ClusterRoleBinding` to bind these two resources, will be created in this step too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following additional OpenShift resources are also created in this step:
*`ClusterRole` - grants permissions to watch and update the routes across the cluster
*`ServiceAccount` - uses permissions to run the newly created pod
*`ClusterRoleBinding` -  binds these two resources
```

+
[NOTE]
====

> If the cluster does not have access to github, you can save the raw contents locally, and run `oc apply -f localfilename.yaml -n cert-manager`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the cluster does not have access to GitHub, you can save the raw contents locally and run `oc apply -f localfilename.yaml -n cert-manager`.
```

====

> . Check to ensure that the new pod `cert-manager-openshift-routes` is running successfully by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Ensure that the new pod `cert-manager-openshift-routes` is running successfully by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n cert-manager get pods
----
+
.Example result
+
[source,terminal]
----
NAME                                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
cert-manager-866d8f788c-9kspc                    1/1     Running   0          4h21m
cert-manager-cainjector-6885c585bd-znws8         1/1     Running   0          4h41m
cert-manager-openshift-routes-75b6bb44cd-f8kd5   1/1     Running   0          6s
cert-manager-webhook-8498785dd9-bvfdf            1/1     Running   0          4h41m
----

> == Deploy a sample application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Deploying a sample application
```

> . Create a new project for our sample application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a new project for your sample application:
```

----
+
. Deploy a hello world application: 
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n hello-world new-app --image=docker.io/openshift/hello-openshift
----
+
. Create a route to expose the application from outside the cluster:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n hello-world create route edge --service=hello-openshift hello-openshift-tls --hostname hello.${DOMAIN}
----
+
. Verify the certificate for the route is untrusted:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ curl -I https://hello.${DOMAIN}
----
.Example output
+
[source,text]
----
curl: (60) SSL: no alternative certificate subject name matches target host name 'hello.example.com'
More details here: https://curl.se/docs/sslcerts.html

curl failed to verify the legitimacy of the server and therefore could not
establish a secure connection to it. To learn more about this situation and
how to fix it, please visit the web page mentioned above.
----
+
. Annotate the route to trigger cert-manager to provision a certificate for the custom domain: 
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n hello-world annotate route hello-openshift-tls cert-manager.io/issuer-kind=ClusterIssuer cert-manager.io/issuer-name=letsencrypt-production
----
+
[NOTE]
====

> It will take a 2-3 minutes for the certificate to be created. The renewal of the certificate will automatically be managed by the cert-manager Operator as it approaches expiry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will take a 2-3 minutes for the certificate to be created. The renewal of the certificate will automatically be managed by the cert-manager Operator as it approaches expiration.
```

====
. Verify the certificate for the route is now trusted:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ curl -I https://hello.${DOMAIN}
----
+
.Example output
+
[source,terminal]
----
HTTP/2 200
date: Thu, 05 Oct 2023 23:45:33 GMT
content-length: 17
content-type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
set-cookie: 52e4465485b6fb4f8a1b1bed128d0f3b=68676068bb32d24f0f558f094ed8e4d7; path=/; HttpOnly; Secure; SameSite=None
cache-control: private
----

== Debugging
[NOTE]
====

> The validation process usually take up to 2-3 minutes to complete while creating certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The validation process usually takes 2-3 minutes to complete while creating certificates.
```

====

> If you face issues during the certificate create step, run `oc describe` against each of the `certificate`,`certificaterequest`,`order` and `challenge` resources to view the events or reasons that will most help with identifying the cause of the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you face issues during the certificate create step, run `oc describe` against each of the `certificate`,`certificaterequest`,`order`, and `challenge` resources to view the events or reasons that will help identify the cause of the issue.
```

[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get certificate,certificaterequest,order,challenge
----

This is a very link:https://cert-manager.io/docs/faq/acme/[helpful guide in debugging certificates] as well.

> You can also use the link:https://cert-manager.io/docs/reference/cmctl/[cmctl] CLI tool for various certificate management activities such as to check the status of certificates, testing renewals and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use the link:https://cert-manager.io/docs/reference/cmctl/[cmctl] CLI tool for various certificate management activities, such checking the status of certificates and testing renewals.
```
